Blog post on Rust/Cryptography (#31)
pyodide/pyodide-blog: content/posts/rust-pyo3-support-in-pyodide.md

been gaining popularity lately. The Cryptography package has been one of the
most often requested packages in the Pyodide issue tracker so it is a priority
for us to support it.

See [this talk by the Cryptography
maintainers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z_Eiy2W0APU) for an interesting
discussion of their reasons for using Rust and the problems in the ecosystem
that needed to be fixed before they could use it.

We want to build the Rust extension module for our WebAssembly-based
distribution. Rust has good support for the <code
class="pkg">wasm32-unknown-unknown</code> target and has popular tools like
<code class="pkg">wasm-bindgen</code>. However, <code
class="pkg">wasm32-unknown-unknown</code> uses a custom "wasm ABI" [which is not
compatible with C/C++
code](https://github.com/rustwasm/team/issues/291#issuecomment-644946504l). To
use Rust in a project that also includes C/C++ code we need to use the <code
class="pkg">wasm32-unknown-emscripten</code> target. Unfortunately, the <code
class="pkg">wasm32-unknown-emscripten</code> target does not work all that well,
due to limited development resources and difficulties coordinating between the
Emscripten and Rust projects.

> In this blog post I will give a technical description of many of the problems I
> ran into in the process of building Rust extension modules for Pyodide.

Reviewer: Maybe it's nice to be clear that you did manage to solve them all and readers will learn about the solutions too?

```suggestion
In this blog post I will give a technical description of many of the challenges I
ran into in the process of building Rust extension modules for Pyodide and their solutions.
```

<style>
.post-content.post-content code {
  font-size: 70%;
}

code.pkg {
  background: white;
  padding: 0px;
  margin: 0px;
}
</style>

### Acknowledgements

Thanks to the Cryptography team for making this necessary and for their
technical advice. Thanks to the <code class="pkg">chrono</code> maintainers and
the Rust team for reviewing and merging patches to improve Emscripten support.

> Thanks to the PyO3 team for their help and enthusiasm and for adding Emscripten

Reviewer: 🙌

archive for the required object files.  This is normally used to turn an archive
file into a shared library
```
In particular, `--whole-archive` requires every file in the library to be an
object file. [Rust libraries contain an extra metadata file called
`lib.rmeta`](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/backend/libs-and-metadata.html#rlib)
hence the error message.

Emscripten has two ways of generating a dynamic library: 

* `-sSIDE_MODULE=1` exports all symbols by wrapping the linker arguments with
  `--whole-archive`
* `-sSIDE_MODULE=2` exports an explicit list of symbols 

Building with `-sSIDE_MODULE=2` is much better for code size because symbols
that are not exported can be inlined or eliminated as dead code during link-time
optimization. But to use `-sSIDE_MODULE=2` we need to calculate the symbols to
export somehow.

Using `-sSIDE_MODULE=2` solves the `lib.rmeta` error because `--whole-archive`
is not passed to the linker. Conveniently, Rust is good at calculating which
symbols should be exported: public symbols with the `#[no_mangle]` attribute are
exported, other symbols are not. In the case of a PyO3 module, the only exported

> symbol is the `PyInit__my_module` function that Python invokes when loading a

Reviewer: So does Rust pass this symbol automatically to the linker, or did you have to add it to the command line?

Author: Rust automatically passes the information to the linker when building a cdylib, this is handled here:
https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/compiler/rustc_codegen_ssa/src/back/link.rs#L1882

native module. 

> It would be great to link our other extension modules with `-sSIDE_MODULE=2` but

Reviewer: I'm a little unsure what this is aspiring to (what "our other extension modules" are).
